---
title: 'what is the LeLe method?'
date: 2023-12-20T12:17:22+01:00
draft: false
weight: 20
---

Learning can be annoying. There are too many interesting topics, it can get
frustrating and you can fall into the trap of shallow learning - keeping
yourself entertained without actually learning anything.

To solve this problem the LeLe method aims to make learning intentional,
enjoyable and forgiving.

It makes learning intentional so that you can find the time to learn and focus
on what you want to learn. Thereby, one goal is to constrain curiosities so
that you are not dragged around from one interesting topic to the next.

It makes learning enjoyable by making it as simple as possible but not simpler.
You don't need a complex fancy learning system. A simple one will do the job.
Often we waste a lot of time searching for the perfect system and random
learning hacks. LeLe will provide you with a simple learning system and a
simple set of learning methods - hacks actually don't work. These are the
things we can simplify. But we can't simplify learning by getting rid of
mistakes, confusion or frustration. They are actually part of learning and
should be embraced. Don't avoid them.

Finally, LeLe aims to make learning forgiving because learning can be
emotionally charged. As mentioned before, learning has to be confusing and
frustrating at some level but you should never beat yourself up emotionally
because of it. Finding the motivation and energy to learn is also difficult.
Often just starting helps but if it doesn't maybe you really need a break to
recharge. Additionally, you might start a learning journey, only to realize
that it wasn't right. It was a fake curiosity. LeLe gives you the room to
explore and forget if necessary. It treats learning as small experiments and
experiments are allowed to fail.

To help with all this, LeLe has three components - mindset, place, and
learning.
