---
title: 'scattered vs shaped learning'
date: 2023-12-20T12:17:22+01:00
draft: false
weight: 40
---

Learning can take place in two ways - planned and random. Both are relevant and
should be included in every learning journey. Planned learning, or as it is
called in LeLe, **shaped learning** is about collecting materials and
assembling them into a learning unit. You can even shape multiple learnings and
intentionally decide what to focus on and what to ignore. This makes shaped
learning very time-intensive and deliberate.

But learning can also happen randomly. Besides taking time to plan a whole
learning unit, there are also moments in which you want to learn immediately.
You stumble across an interesting article or video and are intrigued by its
insights and mentioned concepts. You don't want to put it aside as idle
material for a potential future learning unit. You want to take some quick
notes. You want to make use of the insights now.

Random learning, or as it is called in LeLe, **scattered learning**, is in
contrast to shaped learning. Random insights are scattered around us in almost
all content we consume, be it an article, book, video, lecture or even image.
Instead of collecting and planning a learning unit, you just want to take some
quick notes and connect them to your pre-existing knowledge. Scattered learning
deals with small insights. One article or one video. Not a series of lectures
which might be better suited for a shaped learning unit. This makes scattered
learning curiosity-intensive and fast.

## how to shape a learning

We talked about shaping a learning in detail in the previous article. But to
quickly summarize, shaping a learning is about collecting materials and
assembling them into one learning unit. You do this by clearly defining what
you want to learn and why you want to learn it. After that, you skim and scope
the materials you collected to get a list of concepts you are going to learn
about. It shouldn't be detailed. A rough outline is fine and enough. It's just
to prime your mind and test if you are really curious about the topic. Finally,
you also define how you want to practice it and how much time you want to
invest.

## how to do scattered learning

Scattered learning is more spontaneous and often happens while we are
mindlessly scrolling. So, the first step in scattered learning is to mindlessly
scroll until you stumble across an interesting insight. Or you can
intentionally read an article or watch a video which you saved for later. After
that it's simple. Consume the content, rephrase the insight, and connect it to
other notes you already have.

You can use whatever tool you prefer. The important part is to rephrase and
connect the insight to what you already know.

Make use of both scattered and shaped learning. Don't ignore one or the other.
You can even combine them. Just pick some of your main notes and insights from
your shaped learning and connect them with the notes from your scattered
learning.
