---
title: 'the perfect neurochemical cocktail'
date: 2023-12-20T15:08:17+01:00
draft: false
weight: 10
---

Learning happens in a state of focus and being comfortable with frustration.
This duo triggers the neurochemical cocktail needed for learning which consists
of Acetylcholine, Epinephrine and Dopamine.

Focusing means paying attention and being alert at the same time. Paying
attention releases Acetylcholine which helps with your focus. Being alert, on
the other hand, releases Epinephrine which reduces anxiety and gives you the
energy to learn.

To support your focus and the release of Acetylcholine, define what you want to
learn and why you want to learn it. Additionally, use focusing techniques like
timeboxing or your visual focus. If you can't get yourself to start and focus
because of stress, anxiety or feeling lazy, reduce the emotional burden by
simply just starting small.

On the other hand, Epinephrine is released to wake up your brain. It tells the
neurons to be ready. To support the release of Epinephrine you can prioritise
your sleep, drink some coffee, breathe and meditate, and, like before, have
good reasons to learn. All of which will increase your energy level.

And the last ingredient - Dopamine - will come into play once we start making
mistakes. While learning we will naturally make mistakes. It will get
frustrating. But, instead of running away try to stay and correct those
mistakes. Try to get it right. Try to come closer to understanding. Even if you
don't accomplish it. The effort will pay out. The effort you put in is not for
nothing. It might feel that way but Dopamine works in mysterious way. It still
rewards your learning and helps you keep going. Frustration and Dopamine are
crucial for learning.

Learning happens in a state where this neurochemical trio of Acetylcholine,
Epinephrine and Dopamine work together. Therefore, try to focus and get
comfortable with frustration while learning.

Next, we will talk about how to focus and get comfortable with frustration in
more detail.
