---
title: 'method to improve focus - flexible timeboxing'
date: 2023-12-20T15:08:17+01:00
draft: false
weight: 20
---

Besides embracing frustration, the other important part of learning is
focusing. But our focus can be fragile and we can get easily distracted. Be it
through external things like our phones or internal events like thoughts and
feelings.

Additionally, our focus depends on many variables. It depends on how we slept
the night before, the time of day, what we eat, our emotional state, our stress
level, our energy level, and so on. Focusing and keeping your focus can be
difficult.

Therefore, I tried many different techniques and strategies to improve my
focus. Besides the most obvious one - getting rid of distractions - I arrived
at five techniques that helped me the most. 1 time-based technique and 4
mind-based techniques (mind-based techniques in the next article).

Here is the time-based technique.

## 1. flexible timeboxing

One tool that helps me consistently to focus every day is a simple timer. A
simple timer which is built around three main principles: 1) visual
timeboxing, 2) the idea of your focus being flexible, and 3) taking time to
rest. If you combine these principles with a simple timer, you get the flexible
timeboxing technique.

### visual timeboxing

Don't start working blindly without a sense of time. Instead, use a visual
timer. A timer you can see. Define what you want to learn, remove almost all
distractions, set a timer, and start focusing.

The timer has multiple advantages. If your attention drifts away, which is
quite normal, the timer serves as a reminder to refocus again. You can see the
time and reflect on if you should keep going and focus or if it would be fine
to take a break.

At the end of the timer, you can even reflect if you want to focus for a bit
longer or if you have to take a short break.

### flexible focus

Our ability to focus is not an on-off switch. Our focus is dynamic and
flexible. It oscillates and the intensity of our focus can change over time.
Therefore, it is normal that our attention randomly starts to drift while we
are trying to focus on what is in front of us.

The important thing is to gently bring back your attention.

### take time to rest

One important part of focusing that is often overlooked is taking real breaks.
We have to rest. Focusing is difficult, it drains our energy and resting helps
us recharge.

If we recharge properly, we might be able to focus again later. But be careful.
Still sitting in front of your laptop and watching YouTube videos will not cut
it. It is not true resting and you won't recharge energy. It will have the
opposite effect. It will drain your energy even more which will make focusing
again nearly impossible.

So take a proper break. Stand up. Stretch. Walk around.

### how long to focus

I like to set my initial timer to 52 minutes because I'm used to using the
52/17 method. If my focus feels off, I stop before the 52 minutes. Most of the
time I focus fully for 52 minutes. Sometimes I go beyond the 52 minutes if I
have the energy and motivation. But you should definitely take a real break
after 90 minutes.

This is the time-based focusing technique that helped me the most. Accepting
that your focus is flexible can have a forgiving effect. Instead of blaming
ourselves because we couldn't focus for 3 hours straight, we can accept that
our focus is flexible and work around it instead of against it.
