---
title: 'tldr: learning is supposed to be frustrating'
date: 2023-12-20T15:08:17+01:00
draft: false
weight: 40
---

The flow state is a place where things feel effortless. You know exactly what
to do and you can do it. But learning doesn’t feel effortless. In fact it often
isn't. You have to explore, try to understand and rethink concepts all the
time. And, most probably, you will make mistakes.

Learning is challenging. And sadly there is no hack.

So instead of flowing, learning feels frustrating.

But frustration has a bad reputation. Once we feel it, we stop learning. We
don’t understand. We start making mistakes. We quit. But actually, this feeling
of frustration is the perfect cue to keep learning, not to stop learning.

You feel frustrated because you challenge yourself and your understanding. You
reach a critical point. As mentioned in the previous part, focus and
frustration will trigger a bunch of neurochemicals needed for learning -
epinephrine, acetylcholine and dopamine.

Don't let this neurochemical cocktail go to waste. Stopping to learn when you
are frustrated will only enforce bad habits. If you quit, the neurochemical
cocktail will only reward giving up if it gets difficult instead of rewarding
your learning.

Therefore, don't abandon learning. Don't run away. Stay with the frustration a
bit longer. Give your brain the chance to figure things out and reward the
right thing. The right thing being the best understanding you can come up with
and sticking to learning.

But not all frustration is good. Frustration during learning is necessary and
you can't get rid of it. However, frustration from your learning system is
something you should minimize. We will talk about a simple learning system in
the section "Place and planning". But for now, stay with frustration while
learning and figuring things out.
