---
title: 'play as a portal to learning'
date: 2023-12-20T15:08:17+01:00
draft: false
weight: 50
---

Most of us think of games when we hear playing. But playing is not just about
games. Playing has important traits that can be used as a portal to learning.
Playing helps you tap into focus and embrace frustration - two important
learning components.

We played more when we were younger. We played and explored without
overthinking. Everything was a huge experiment for us, and we tried, failed,
and learned. But this changed while growing up. Our playful and unconventional
exploration style slowly transformed itself into something serious, linear, and
anxious.

Learning nowadays feels more like a drill. We are so goal-oriented that we just
want a set of instructions, memorize them, and we are done. But learning is
much more than that. Learning is nonlinear, recursive and excursive. Recursive
meaning: you have to rethink, re-understanding and re-practice to find and
answer gaps and questions in your understanding. Excursive because your
learning journey is not the same as someone else's. You have another set of
preknowledge which helps or even hinders your understanding of new concepts.

We should embrace play as a learning style and mindset again. Moving from
seriousness and linearity towards playfulness and unconventional exploration.

## why learn by playing?

**Play can increase our focus.**  Once we start playing, nothing in the world
can distract us or pull us away from it. We lose the sense of time and we are
just immersed in what we are doing.

**Play lets us explore and test without any judgment.** If you play, you don’t
put any pressure on yourself. You have an idea and you just tinker with it.
Either it works or it doesn’t. Play helps you embrace uncertainty and reduce
frustration at the same time.

**Play lets you repeatedly practice.** Because there is no judgment on doing it
poorly at first, we also tend to play and practice repeatedly; over and over
until we master a skill. This repetitive practice despite frustration and
confusion helps you to learn.

Tapping into play for learning won’t happen with a set of given instructions.
It is more a mindset we have to develop rather than a hack which can be simply
applied. We have to repeatedly remind ourselves that a playful mindset is the
key to learning; not a serious mindset where frustration drives us away from
learning. Play can be a powerful portal to learning.
