---
title: 'the three learning phases'
date: 2023-12-20T12:17:22+01:00
draft: false
weight: 10
---

Learning is more than just sitting down and starting to study. Learning has
three phases which repeat themself and can even intertwin. These three phases
are priming, studying and practising.

## priming

**Priming** aims to get an abstract and rough idea about a topic. No details.
You skim, explore and try to understand the connection of abstract concepts.
You just worry about the big picture and ignore all the details. The details
will come later in the studying phase.

Priming is like the beginning of a puzzle. You don't jump right into all the
small puzzle pieces. In the beginning, they have no meaning. The first thing
you do is to look at the picture you want to puzzle. You get a rough idea of
what is where and which colors are used in which section. Only by getting a
big-picture view will all the small puzzle pieces become meaningful and
puzzling will get easier.

It's the same for learning. You don't jump into all the details. Prime first.
Get an abstract idea of important concepts and how they are connected together.
This will give meaning to all the details to come.

## studying

After priming, comes **studying**. Studying means diving into the details and
understanding them. But be careful, while studying we tend to drift towards
transcribing notes and trying to memorize them. We run into the risk of not
thinking about anything.

However, studying only results in learning if we think and engage in
higher-order learning. Higher-order learning happens according to Bloom's
taxonomy when we start analyzing, evaluating and creating based on what we
learn (Bloom's taxonomy from low to higher order learning is: remember,
understand, apply, analyse, evaluate, create).

You can analyse and evaluate by comparing, contrasting and connecting ideas
together. You try to understand, explain it to yourself and map it out. Always
iterate and adjust your mental model if needed.

If you engage in higher-order learning like analyzing and evaluating, you
automatically also engage in lower-order learning like understanding and
remembering.

## practising

Finally, the last phase is to **practice**. Practising what you studied helps
you to tap into the highest order of learning: create. Creating something and
practising allows you to build experience and wisdom.

How you practice depends on what you are trying to learn. If you are learning a
skill, you can practice by applying what you learned in your own project. If
you are learning something more information-heavy, you can practice by testing
and interleaved recall (a combination of interleaving and active recall). This
helps you tackle questions and problems from different perspectives and find
your own way to an answer.

All of these phases don't happen only once but they rather repeat. You first
prime and get an abstract idea. This will trigger your curiosity and open up
some questions. Then you start studying. Get a bit more detailed, look for
answers and add another layer to your primed understanding. After that, you can
practice what you learnt. Both studying and practising will reveal gaps in your
understanding and open up new questions which you then can follow. Follow them
by first priming, then studying and then practising. After that, it repeats
itself over and over again.

This constant iteration and following open questions is why learning is
recursive and excursive.
